doc/user_guide/source/AdvancedFunctionalities.rst, before:

.. _advanced_functionalities:

Advanced functionalities
========================

Advanced parameters
-------------------

Advanced parameters are intended to setup optimization problems, algorithmic and output parameters when specific needs are present. Only a few advanced parameters are presented below; all advanced parameters can be obtained with ``$NOMAD_HOME -h advanced``. Also a complete list of parameters and a short description is available in :ref:``appendix_parameters``.

.. _fixed_variable:

``FIXED_VARIABLE``
""""""""""""""""""

This parameter is used to fix some variables to a value. This value is optional if at least one starting point is defined. The parameter may be entered with several types of arguments:

* A vector of :math:`n values with format ``(v0 v1 ... vn-1)``. Character ```-`` is used for free variables.

* An index range if at least one starting point has been defined. ``FIXED_VARIABLE i-j``: variables ``i`` to ``j`` are fixed to their initial (``i-j`` may be replaced by ``i`` only). See :ref`x0` for practical examples of index ranges.

.. _seed:

``SEED``
""""""""

The directions that NOMAD explores during the *Poll* phase are dependent upon the seed. The seed is used to generate a pseudo-random direction on a unit n-dimensional sphere. The user can change the sequence of directions by setting ``SEED`` to a positive integer or ``-1``. If ``-1`` or ``DIFF`` is entered the seed is different for each run (PID is used).

Other aspects of NOMAD may depend on a pseudo-random sequence of numbers depending on selected options: *LH Search* and *PSD Mads*.

.. _eval_opportunistic:

``EVAL_OPPORTUNISTIC``
""""""""""""""""""""""

The opportunistic strategy consists in terminating the evaluations of a list of trial points at a given step of the algorithm as soon as an improved value is found.

This strategy is decided with the parameter ``EVAL_OPPORTUNISTIC`` and applies to both the *Poll* and *Search* steps. Search with NOMAD help ``$NOMAD_HOME/bin/nomad -h OPPORTUNISTIC`` for more options.

When evaluations are performed by blocks (see :ref:`bloc_evaluations`) the opportunistic strategy applies after evaluating a block of trial points.

.. _variable_group:

``VARIABLE_GROUP``
""""""""""""""""""

By default NOMAD creates one group that combines all continuous, integer, and binary variables.

In batch mode, the ``VARIABLE_GROUP`` parameter followed by variable indices is used to explicitly form a group of variables. Each group of variable generates its own polling directions. The parameter may be entered several times to define more than one group of variables. Variables in a group may be of different types.

.. _quad_model_search:

``QUAD_MODEL_SEARCH`` and ``SGTELIB_MODEL_SEARCH``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The *Search* phase of the *MADS* algorithm can use models of the objectives and constraints that are constructed dynamically from all the evaluations made. By default, a quadratic model is used to propose new points to be evaluated with the blackbox. To disable the use of quadratic models, the parameter ``QUAD_MODEL_SEARCH`` can be set to ``no``.

Models from the *SGTELIB* library can be used by setting ``SGTELIB_MODEL_SEARCH`` to ``yes``. Many parameters are available to control *SGTELIB* models: ``$NOMAD_HOME/bin/nomad -h SGTELIB``.

.. _granularity:

``GRANULARITY``
"""""""""""""""

The *MADS* algorithm handles granular variables, i.e. variables with a controlled number of decimals. For real numbers the granularity is 0. For integers and binary variables the granularity is automatically set to one.

The possible syntaxes to specify the granularity of the variables are as follows:

* :math:`n` real values with format ``GRANULARITY (v0 v1 ... vn-1)``.

* ``GRANULARITY i-j v``: coordinates  ``i` to  ``j`` set to ``v``.

* ``GRANULARITY * v``: all coordinates set to ``v``.




.. _block_evaluations:

Blackbox evaluation of a block of trial points
----------------------------------------------

At different phases of the MADS algorithm, different numbers of trial points are generated.
For example, having selected the direction type as ORTHO 2N, the maximum number of points generated during
the Poll step will be 2N+2. These points can be partitioned into blocks of trial points to be
submitted sequentially for evaluation to a blackbox program. The maximum size of a block of
evaluations is controlled by the BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE. By default, a block contains a single trial
point. This can be changed by the user but the blackbox program must support the evaluation
of a varying number of trial points, up to BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE.

Due to the strategy of by-block evaluation, the maximum number of evaluations requested to
NOMAD may be exceeded if BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE > 1. The reason for this behaviour is that
block results are analyzed only after completion and the maximum number of evaluations may
be exceeded when checking this termination criterion.
The opportunistic strategy (enabled by default) may apply after each block of trial points.
Evaluations of blocks of trial points can be performed in parallel by the blackbox program. This
strategy of parallelization must be setup by the user within the blackbox. Examples are provided
in what follows.

Batch mode
^^^^^^^^^^
In batch mode, NOMAD creates input files which can contain at most
BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE trial points separated by a linebreak. Each point is given as a row of values.
The user must provide a blackbox program that can read the input file, evaluate them and
output the objective and constraints functions (in the order provided by the BB_OUTPUT_TYPE
parameter) for each trial point in the same order as provided in the input file.
A blackbox program may fail to evaluate some of the trial points. When block of trial points is
submitted the content of the output file must reflect the outputs for each point.
If one value provided in the output file
cannot be read by NOMAD, then the corresponding trial point is considered as having failed.
The trial points that have failed will not be evaluated again.
An example of blackbox program written in Perl scripting language is provided in the
directory ``$NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/batch/single_obj_parallel``. The script ``parallel_BBWrapper.pl``
calls up to 4 instances of the executable bb.exe to evaluate 4 trial points in parallel.

::

  > cd $NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/batch/single_obj_parallel
  > more x.txt
  1 2 3 4 5
  0 0 0 0 0
  2 2 2 2 2
  5 4 3 2 1
  > perl parallel_BBWrapper.pl x.txt
  5 5 -65
   0 -20 20
   2 -20 -20
   1 5 -65

The same directory holds the parameter file that specifies this blackbox program with blocks of 4 trial points:

::

    DIMENSION      5              # number of variables

    BB_EXE "$perl parallel_BBWrapper.pl"
    BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE 4

    BB_OUTPUT_TYPE OBJ PB EB

    X0             ( 0 0 0 0 0 )  # starting point

    LOWER_BOUND    * -6.0         # all variables are >= -6
    UPPER_BOUND    ( 5 6 7 - - )  # x_1 <= 5, x_2 <= 6, x_3 <= 7
                                  # x_4 and x_5 have no bounds

    MAX_BLOCK_EVAL     20         # the algorithm terminates when
                                  # 20 blocks have been evaluated

    TMP_DIR /tmp
    DISPLAY_DEGREE 2
    DISPLAY_STATS BLK_EVA BLK_SIZE OBJ
    DISPLAY_ALL_EVAL true


Library mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^
Please refer to ``$NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/library/single_obj_parallel`` for an example
on how to manage a block of evaluations in parallel using pThreads and Semaphore.

When evaluations are performed by blocks, i.e., when ``BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE`` is greater
than one, the opportunistic strategy applies after evaluating a block of trial points.



.. _parallel_evaluations:

Parallel evaluations
--------------------

...

.. _psd_mads:

PSD Mads
--------

...

Commit message:

Small paragraph about parallel evaluations

doc/user_guide/source/AdvancedFunctionalities.rst, after:

.. _advanced_functionalities:

Advanced functionalities
========================

Advanced parameters
-------------------

Advanced parameters are intended to setup optimization problems, algorithmic and output parameters when specific needs are present. Only a few advanced parameters are presented below; all advanced parameters can be obtained with ``$NOMAD_HOME -h advanced``. Also a complete list of parameters and a short description is available in :ref:``appendix_parameters``.

.. _fixed_variable:

``FIXED_VARIABLE``
""""""""""""""""""

This parameter is used to fix some variables to a value. This value is optional if at least one starting point is defined. The parameter may be entered with several types of arguments:

* A vector of :math:`n values with format ``(v0 v1 ... vn-1)``. Character ```-`` is used for free variables.

* An index range if at least one starting point has been defined. ``FIXED_VARIABLE i-j``: variables ``i`` to ``j`` are fixed to their initial (``i-j`` may be replaced by ``i`` only). See :ref`x0` for practical examples of index ranges.

.. _seed:

``SEED``
""""""""

The directions that NOMAD explores during the *Poll* phase are dependent upon the seed. The seed is used to generate a pseudo-random direction on a unit n-dimensional sphere. The user can change the sequence of directions by setting ``SEED`` to a positive integer or ``-1``. If ``-1`` or ``DIFF`` is entered the seed is different for each run (PID is used).

Other aspects of NOMAD may depend on a pseudo-random sequence of numbers depending on selected options: *LH Search* and *PSD Mads*.

.. _eval_opportunistic:

``EVAL_OPPORTUNISTIC``
""""""""""""""""""""""

The opportunistic strategy consists in terminating the evaluations of a list of trial points at a given step of the algorithm as soon as an improved value is found.

This strategy is decided with the parameter ``EVAL_OPPORTUNISTIC`` and applies to both the *Poll* and *Search* steps. Search with NOMAD help ``$NOMAD_HOME/bin/nomad -h OPPORTUNISTIC`` for more options.

When evaluations are performed by blocks (see :ref:`bloc_evaluations`) the opportunistic strategy applies after evaluating a block of trial points.

.. _variable_group:

``VARIABLE_GROUP``
""""""""""""""""""

By default NOMAD creates one group that combines all continuous, integer, and binary variables.

In batch mode, the ``VARIABLE_GROUP`` parameter followed by variable indices is used to explicitly form a group of variables. Each group of variable generates its own polling directions. The parameter may be entered several times to define more than one group of variables. Variables in a group may be of different types.

.. _quad_model_search:

``QUAD_MODEL_SEARCH`` and ``SGTELIB_MODEL_SEARCH``
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The *Search* phase of the *MADS* algorithm can use models of the objectives and constraints that are constructed dynamically from all the evaluations made. By default, a quadratic model is used to propose new points to be evaluated with the blackbox. To disable the use of quadratic models, the parameter ``QUAD_MODEL_SEARCH`` can be set to ``no``.

Models from the *SGTELIB* library can be used by setting ``SGTELIB_MODEL_SEARCH`` to ``yes``. Many parameters are available to control *SGTELIB* models: ``$NOMAD_HOME/bin/nomad -h SGTELIB``.

.. _granularity:

``GRANULARITY``
"""""""""""""""

The *MADS* algorithm handles granular variables, i.e. variables with a controlled number of decimals. For real numbers the granularity is 0. For integers and binary variables the granularity is automatically set to one.

The possible syntaxes to specify the granularity of the variables are as follows:

* :math:`n` real values with format ``GRANULARITY (v0 v1 ... vn-1)``.

* ``GRANULARITY i-j v``: coordinates  ``i` to  ``j`` set to ``v``.

* ``GRANULARITY * v``: all coordinates set to ``v``.




.. _block_evaluations:

Blackbox evaluation of a block of trial points
----------------------------------------------

At different phases of the MADS algorithm, different numbers of trial points are generated.
For example, having selected the direction type as ORTHO 2N, the maximum number of points generated during
the Poll step will be 2N+2. These points can be partitioned into blocks of trial points to be
submitted sequentially for evaluation to a blackbox program. The maximum size of a block of
evaluations is controlled by the BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE. By default, a block contains a single trial
point. This can be changed by the user but the blackbox program must support the evaluation
of a varying number of trial points, up to BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE.

Due to the strategy of by-block evaluation, the maximum number of evaluations requested to
NOMAD may be exceeded if BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE > 1. The reason for this behaviour is that
block results are analyzed only after completion and the maximum number of evaluations may
be exceeded when checking this termination criterion.
The opportunistic strategy (enabled by default) may apply after each block of trial points.
Evaluations of blocks of trial points can be performed in parallel by the blackbox program. This
strategy of parallelization must be setup by the user within the blackbox. Examples are provided
in what follows.

Batch mode
^^^^^^^^^^
In batch mode, NOMAD creates input files which can contain at most
BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE trial points separated by a linebreak. Each point is given as a row of values.
The user must provide a blackbox program that can read the input file, evaluate them and
output the objective and constraints functions (in the order provided by the BB_OUTPUT_TYPE
parameter) for each trial point in the same order as provided in the input file.
A blackbox program may fail to evaluate some of the trial points. When block of trial points is
submitted the content of the output file must reflect the outputs for each point.
If one value provided in the output file
cannot be read by NOMAD, then the corresponding trial point is considered as having failed.
The trial points that have failed will not be evaluated again.
An example of blackbox program written in Perl scripting language is provided in the
directory ``$NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/batch/single_obj_parallel``. The script ``parallel_BBWrapper.pl``
calls up to 4 instances of the executable bb.exe to evaluate 4 trial points in parallel.

::

  > cd $NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/batch/single_obj_parallel
  > more x.txt
  1 2 3 4 5
  0 0 0 0 0
  2 2 2 2 2
  5 4 3 2 1
  > perl parallel_BBWrapper.pl x.txt
  5 5 -65
   0 -20 20
   2 -20 -20
   1 5 -65

The same directory holds the parameter file that specifies this blackbox program with blocks of 4 trial points:

::

    DIMENSION      5              # number of variables

    BB_EXE "$perl parallel_BBWrapper.pl"
    BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE 4

    BB_OUTPUT_TYPE OBJ PB EB

    X0             ( 0 0 0 0 0 )  # starting point

    LOWER_BOUND    * -6.0         # all variables are >= -6
    UPPER_BOUND    ( 5 6 7 - - )  # x_1 <= 5, x_2 <= 6, x_3 <= 7
                                  # x_4 and x_5 have no bounds

    MAX_BLOCK_EVAL     20         # the algorithm terminates when
                                  # 20 blocks have been evaluated

    TMP_DIR /tmp
    DISPLAY_DEGREE 2
    DISPLAY_STATS BLK_EVA BLK_SIZE OBJ
    DISPLAY_ALL_EVAL true


Library mode
^^^^^^^^^^^^
Please refer to ``$NOMAD_HOME/examples/basic/library/single_obj_parallel`` for an example
on how to manage a block of evaluations in parallel using pThreads and Semaphore.

When evaluations are performed by blocks, i.e., when ``BB_MAX_BLOCK_SIZE`` is greater
than one, the opportunistic strategy applies after evaluating a block of trial points.



.. _parallel_evaluations:

Parallel evaluations
--------------------

When OpenMP is available, the user may provide the number of threads ``NB_THREADS_OPENMP``
to efficiently access the computer cores. If this parameter is not set, OpenMP computes
the number of available threads. The evaluations of trial points are dispatched to these threads.

.. _psd_mads:

PSD Mads
--------

...
