doc/user_guide/source/Installation.rst, before:

.. _installation:

Installation
============

.. warning:: Current version of the source code does not support compilation with Microsoft Visual Studio. Future versions will provide this option.


On Linux and Mac OS X, NOMAD can be compiled using *CMake*, a tool to manage building of source code.

The minimum version of *CMake* is 3.14. Older versions should trigger an error.

A recent C++ compiler is also required. *CMake* will detect which compiler is available.

.. warning:: Some older version of *CMake* do not trigger an explicit error on the version number.
   If the ``cmake`` commands fail, check the version manually on the command line

  ::

    cmake --version

  **The minimum acceptable version is 3.14.**



.. note:: If the version of *CMake* is older than 3.14 or if you do not have *CMake* installed,
   we recommend to install *CMake* using a **package manager**. The other option is to
   follow the procedure given at `cmake.org <https://cmake.org/install/>`_ to obtain binaries.

   For Mac OSX, *CMake* can be installed on the command line using package manager `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org/>`_ or `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_.

   For Linux, several package managers exist to automate the procedure.


The NOMAD installation procedure has the three following steps: **configuration, building and installation**.

.. warning:: Before starting the procedure we recommend to set the environment variable ``$NOMAD_HOME`` with the path where NOMAD has been copied.

  ::

    export NOMAD_HOME=/home/myUserName/PathToNomad


  The remaining of the documentation uses this ``$NOMAD_HOME`` environment variable.





.. _cmake_configuration:

1- Configuration using provided ``CMakeLists.txt`` files
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

On the command line, in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory::

  cmake -S . -B build/release


.. sidebar:: Building options

     To enable time stats build::

        cmake -DTIME_STATS=ON -S . -B build/release

     To enable interfaces (C and Python) building::

        cmake -DBUILD_INTERFACES=ON -S . -B build/release

     To disable *OpenMP* compilation::

       cmake -DTEST_OPENMP=OFF -S . -B build/release


This command creates the files and directories for building (``-B``) in ``build/release``. The source (``-S``) ``CMakeLists.txt`` file is in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory.

The command can be modified to enable/disable some options (see side bar).

*OpenMP* is used for parallelization of evaluations. *CMake* will detect if *OpenMP* is available by default. To forcefully deactivate compilation with *OpenMP*, see option in side bar.




2- Build
""""""""

Build the libraries and applications::

  cmake --build build/release

Option ``--parallel xx`` can be added for faster build

3- Install
""""""""""

Copy binaries and headers in build/release/[bin, include, lib] and in the examples/tests directories::

  cmake --install build/release

The executable ``nomad`` will installed into the directory::

  $NOMAD_HOME/build/release/bin/

Additionally a symbolic link to ``nomad`` binary is available::

  $NOMAD_HOME/bin




Bulding for debug version
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

The procedure to configure, build and install the ``debug`` version is the following. On the command line in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory::

  cmake -S . -B build/debug -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug

  cmake --build build/debug

  cmake --install build/debug


Use another compiler
""""""""""""""""""""

The environment variables ``CC`` and ``CXX`` can be used to select the ``C`` and ``C++`` compilers.

.. note:: ``Clang`` is the default compiler for Mac OSX using XCode. But, *OpenMP* (used for parallel evaluations)
   support is disabled in *Clang* that come with *Xcode*.
   Users of Mac OSX can install and use another compiler to enable *OpenMP* support.
   For example, ``GCC`` compilers can be obtained using `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org/>`_ or `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_.


Testing installation
====================

Once building and installation have been performed some tests can be performed.
By default the examples are built and can be tested::

  cd build/release
  ctest

Option ``--parallel xx`` can be added for faster execution.
The log of the tests can be found in ``$NOMAD_HOME/build/release/Testing/Temporary``.

Commit message:

Add nomad binary test for nomad version

doc/user_guide/source/Installation.rst, after:

.. _installation:

Installation
============

.. warning:: Current version of the source code does not support compilation with Microsoft Visual Studio. Future versions will provide this option.


On Linux and Mac OS X, NOMAD can be compiled using *CMake*, a tool to manage building of source code.

The minimum version of *CMake* is 3.14. Older versions should trigger an error.

A recent C++ compiler is also required. *CMake* will detect which compiler is available.

.. warning:: Some older version of *CMake* do not trigger an explicit error on the version number.
   If the ``cmake`` commands fail, check the version manually on the command line

  ::

    cmake --version

  **The minimum acceptable version is 3.14.**



.. note:: If the version of *CMake* is older than 3.14 or if you do not have *CMake* installed,
   we recommend to install *CMake* using a **package manager**. The other option is to
   follow the procedure given at `cmake.org <https://cmake.org/install/>`_ to obtain binaries.

   For Mac OSX, *CMake* can be installed on the command line using package manager `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org/>`_ or `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_.

   For Linux, several package managers exist to automate the procedure.


The NOMAD installation procedure has the three following steps: **configuration, building and installation**.

.. warning:: Before starting the procedure we recommend to set the environment variable ``$NOMAD_HOME`` with the path where NOMAD has been copied.

  ::

    export NOMAD_HOME=/home/myUserName/PathToNomad


  The remaining of the documentation uses this ``$NOMAD_HOME`` environment variable.





.. _cmake_configuration:

1- Configuration using provided ``CMakeLists.txt`` files
""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

On the command line, in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory::

  cmake -S . -B build/release


.. sidebar:: Building options

     To enable time stats build::

        cmake -DTIME_STATS=ON -S . -B build/release

     To enable interfaces (C and Python) building::

        cmake -DBUILD_INTERFACES=ON -S . -B build/release

     To disable *OpenMP* compilation::

       cmake -DTEST_OPENMP=OFF -S . -B build/release


This command creates the files and directories for building (``-B``) in ``build/release``. The source (``-S``) ``CMakeLists.txt`` file is in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory.

The command can be modified to enable/disable some options (see side bar).

*OpenMP* is used for parallelization of evaluations. *CMake* will detect if *OpenMP* is available by default. To forcefully deactivate compilation with *OpenMP*, see option in side bar.




2- Build
""""""""

Build the libraries and applications::

  cmake --build build/release

Option ``--parallel xx`` can be added for faster build

3- Install
""""""""""

Copy binaries and headers in build/release/[bin, include, lib] and in the examples/tests directories::

  cmake --install build/release

The executable ``nomad`` will installed into the directory::

  $NOMAD_HOME/build/release/bin/

Additionally a symbolic link to ``nomad`` binary is available::

  $NOMAD_HOME/bin



Bulding for debug version
"""""""""""""""""""""""""

The procedure to configure, build and install the ``debug`` version is the following. On the command line in the ``$NOMAD_HOME`` directory::

  cmake -S . -B build/debug -D CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug

  cmake --build build/debug

  cmake --install build/debug


Use another compiler
""""""""""""""""""""

The environment variables ``CC`` and ``CXX`` can be used to select the ``C`` and ``C++`` compilers.

.. note:: ``Clang`` is the default compiler for Mac OSX using XCode. But, *OpenMP* (used for parallel evaluations)
   support is disabled in *Clang* that come with *Xcode*.
   Users of Mac OSX can install and use another compiler to enable *OpenMP* support.
   For example, ``GCC`` compilers can be obtained using `MacPorts <https://www.macports.org/>`_ or `Homebrew <http://brew.sh/>`_.


Testing installation
====================

Once building and installation have been performed some tests can be performed.

The NOMAD binary can be tested::

  $NOMAD_HOME/bin/nomad -v

This should return the version number on the command line.


Additionally, by default the examples are built and can be tested::

  cd build/release
  ctest

Option ``--parallel xx`` can be added for faster execution.
The log of the tests can be found in ``$NOMAD_HOME/build/release/Testing/Temporary``.
